What is LSD?
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is an illicit hallucinogenic drug. It’s a chemical extracted from a fungus.

It comes as an odourless white powder. LSD is also sometimes sold as:

a liquid
in tablets
in capsules
The pure form of LSD is very strong, so it’s usually diluted with other things.

It’s usually taken by dropping LSD solution onto a material such as:

gelatine sheets
pieces of blotting paper
sugar cubes
These materials release the drug when swallowed or dissolved under your tongue.

LSD can also be:

sniffed
injected
smoked
applied to the skin
LSD is also known as:

acid
trips
tabs
microdots
dots
Lucy
What are the effects of taking LSD?
LSD can powerfully distort your senses. You may:

see changing shapes or colours
hallucinate
have intensified moods
have altered thought processes
People who use LSD have ‘trips’, which can be enjoyable or can be very frightening. They can involve:

seeing, smelling, hearing or touching things that aren’t real
more intense senses
a distorted sense of time and space
strange feelings in your body, like floating
rapidly changing or intense emotions
altered state of thinking
The short-term effects of LSD may also include:

dilated pupils
confusion
dizziness or headaches
nausea or vomiting
insomnia
muscles twitching
having flushes, sweats or chills
increased heart rate and blood pressure
The effects of LSD usually begin in 20 to 60 minutes. The effects of LSD usually last between to 12 hours, depending on the dose taken.

In the days after using LSD, you may experience:

insomnia
fatigue (tiredness)
body and muscle aches
depression
LSD can affect people differently based on:

how much you take
your height and weight
your general health
your mood
your past experience with hallucinogens
whether you use LSD on its own or with other drugs
whether you use alone or with others, at home or at a party
What can go wrong with LSD?
LSD users may experience a ‘bad trip’, which is common when using LSD for the first time.

If you have a bad trip, you might experience:

extreme anxiety or fear
frightening hallucinations
panic — making you take risks (like running into the traffic or jumping from high places)
feeling you are losing control or going mad
paranoia — feeling that other people want to harm you
Very rarely, someone experiencing a bad trip may attempt suicide or become violent.

If someone you know is having a bad trip, it may last some hours. You should stay with, reassure and comfort them until the effects of the drug wear off. They may not get over a bad trip for several days.

Call an ambulance immediately on Triple Zero (000) if a person who has taken LSD:

isn’t waking up
is having abdominal pain or seizures (fits)
is overheating
is paranoid and you can’t calm them down
You should also call an ambulance if you are concerned that the effects of LSD may have caused a person to fall and injure their head.

If the person has been mixing LSD with other drugs, tell the paramedic exactly what they’ve taken.

Can LSD cause long-term problems?
It’s possible to experience flashbacks weeks, months or years after taking LSD. Flashbacks are when you feel the effects of the drug again, like having hallucinations, for a minute or 2. They can be frightening and happen more in people who use LSD regularly.

Some LSD users may develop hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. This involves long-term hallucinogenic experiences, which can be distressing.

Using LSD can damage your memory and concentration. LSD may also trigger or worsenmental health problems like:

depression
anxiety
schizophrenia
What if I use other drugs or alcohol together with LSD?
The effects of taking LSD with other drugs (including those purchased over the counter or prescribed by your doctor) can be unpredictable and dangerous.

You can increase your risk of a bad trip or a stroke if you use LSD with:

ice
speed
ecstasy
Using LSD with alcohol may make you more uncoordinated and increase the chance of:

nausea
vomiting
Can I become dependent on LSD?
LSD use does not usually cause physical dependence. Regular LSD users may experience a need or craving if they stop using the drug. However, this is not common.

Anyone can develop tolerance to LSD. Tolerance is when you need more of the drug to achieve the same effects.

Taking LSD for 3 or 4 consecutive days may lead to a higher level of tolerance. This is where no amount of the drug can produce the desired effects. After a short time of not using LSD — 3 to 4 days — normal tolerance returns.

How can I stop using LSD?
People who take LSD don’t usually need to seek treatment. However, if you want to stop using LSD and want advice, you can speak to your doctor. They can suggest general treatment options, such as:

participation in support groups
counselling and therapy
referral to an addiction specialist
inpatient detox and rehabilitation
Resources and support
See 'What are the effects of taking drugs?' on the Department of Health website for more information.

Find out more about how drugs and alcohol can impact your health, including where to find help and support.

You or someone you know may be finding it hard to manage issues related to drug use. You can try healthdirect’s Symptom Checker to get advice on when to seek professional help. The Symptom Checker guides you to the next appropriate healthcare step for you. This could be:

self-care
talking to a health professional
going to a hospital
calling triple zero (000)
You can find support and information about LSD through:

the Alcohol and Drug Foundation website or you can call their Drug Info and Advice Line on 1300 85 85 84
the Drug Help website or call the Alcohol Drug Information Service (ADIS) on 1800 250 015
the Turning Point website — Australia’s leading national addiction treatment, training and research centre —or call them on 1800 250 015
the Touchbase website for Australians identifying as LGBTI
Narcotics Anonymous Australia on 1300 652 820
the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline on 1800 250 015
Lifeline on 13 11 14
Support for injection behaviour
If you inject LSD, you can reduce your risk of blood-borne disease by attending a Needle and Syringe Program (NSP).

Needle and Syringe Programs provide clean needles or syringes to people who inject drugs. It’s sometimes referred to as ‘needle exchange’.

The types of Needle and Syringe Programs vary, from pharmacies to vending machines.

You can also find a local Needle and Syringe Program using the healthdirect Service Finder. Select ‘By name’ and type ‘needle’ into the search bar.